Aim: Introduction and installation of WEKA tool.
Theory:
Weka stands for Waikato Environment for Knowledge Analysis. It is open-source software
developed in Java language. It was developed at the University of Waikato in New Zealand.
The initial versions of Weka were written in C; around 1999 java-based Weka was released.
Weka is a data mining software that uses a collection of machine learning and deep learning
algorithms. It is a data mining workbench containing a collection of visualization tools and
algorithms for data analysis and predictive modelling. It supports several data mining tasks like
data preprocessing, regression, classification, clustering, and feature selection. We can call the
algorithm directly to the data set or call from our code.
Installing Weka on Windows:
Follow the below steps to install Weka on Windows:
Step 1: Visit firehorse.com/download-weka-64/. Click on Free Download.
Step 2: It will redirect to a new webpage, click on Start Download. Downloading of the
executable file will start shortly.
Step 3: Now check for the executable file in downloads in your system and run it.
Step 4: It will prompt confirmation to make changes to your system. Click on Yes.
Step 5: Setup screen will appear, click on Next.
Step 6: The next screen will be of License Agreement. Click on I Agree.
Step 7: Next screen is of choosing components, all components are already marked so don’t
change anything just click on the Install button.
Step 8: The next screen will be of installing location so choose the drive which will have
sufficient memory space for installation.
Step 9: Next screen will be of choosing the Start menu folder so just click on Install Button.
Step 10: After this installation process will start and will hardly take a minute to complete the
installation.
Step 11: Click on the Next button after the installation process is complete.
Step 12: Click on Finish to finish the installation process.
Step 13: Weka is successfully installed on the system and an icon is created on the desktop.
Step 14: Run the software and see the interface.
