Aim: Implementation of Visualization technique on ARFF files using WEKA.
Theory: Data visualization is actually a set of data points and information that are represented
graphically to make it easy and quick for user to understand. Data visualization is good if
it has a clear meaning, purpose, and is very easy to interpret, without requiring context.
Tools of data visualization provide an accessible way to see and understand trends, outliers,
and patterns in data by using visual effects or elements such as a chart, graphs, and maps.
Characteristics of Effective Graphical Visual:
• It shows or visualizes data very clearly in an understandable manner.
• It encourages viewers to compare different pieces of data.
• It closely integrates statistical and verbal descriptions of data set.
• It grabs our interest, focuses our mind, and keeps our eyes on message as
human brain tends to focus on visual data more than written data.
• It also helps in identifying area that needs more attention and improvement.
• Using graphical representation, a story can be told more efficiently. Also, it
requires less time to understand picture than it takes to understand textual data.
About the Dataset Used:
Iris Dataset (iris.arff)
o Description: A well-known dataset used for classification and clustering tasks.
o Instances: 150
o Attributes:
• Sepal length (Numeric)
• Sepal width (Numeric)
• Petal length (Numeric)
• Petal width (Numeric)
o Class label (Nominal) – Iris-setosa, Iris-versicolor, Iris-virginica
o Use Case: Visualization, Clustering, and Classification.
Steps:
Step 1: Go to the Preprocess tab and open IRIS.arff dataset.
Step 2: The dataset has 4 attributes and 1 class label as shown below:
Step 3: To visualize the dataset, go to the Visualize tab. The tab shows the attributes plot matrix.
The dataset attributes are marked on the x-axis and y-axis while the instances are plotted. The
box with the x-axis attribute and y-axis attribute can be enlarged.
Step 4: Click on the box of the plot to enlarge. For example, x: petal length and y: petalwidth.
The class labels are represented in different colors (which can be changed):
10
• Class label- Iris-setosa: blue color
• Class label- Iris-versicolor: red
• Class label-Iris-virginica-green
Step 5: Click on the instance represented by ‘x’ in the plot. It will give the instance details.
Some of the points in the plot appear darker than other points. These points represent 2 or more
instances with the same class label and the same value of attributes plotted on the graph such
as petalwidth and petallength.
The figure below represents a point with 2 instances of information.
Step 6: The X and Y-axis attributes can be changed from the right panel in Visualize graph.
Step 7: The Jitter tab is used to add randomness to the plot. Sometimes the points overlap. With
jitter tab, the darker spots represent multiple instances.
Step 8: To get a clearer view of the dataset and remove outliers, the user can select an instance
from the dropdown. Click on the “select instance” dropdown. Choose “Rectangle”. With this,
the user will be able to select points in the plot by plotting a rectangle.
Step 9: Click on “Submit”. Only the selected dataset points will be displayed and the other
points will be excluded from the graph. The figure below shows the points from the selected
rectangular shape. The plot represents points with only 3 class labels. The user can click on
“Save” to save the dataset or “Reset” to select another instance. The dataset will be saved a
separately.ARFF file.
